Mahatma Gandhi and Truth and Non-Violence
Mahatma Gandhi is often remembered within the public imagination as a
prophet of non-violence. This identification can be strongly anchored and
rightly  qualified  as  reviving  a  fundamental  ethical  principle  of  Jainism
(along with Samkhya), one of the heterodox schools of Indian philosophy.
Jainism provides philosophical justification to the ethical principle of non-
violence.  According  to  Jainism,  ahimsa,  or  non-violence  entails  strict
refraining in thought, word and action from any kind of injury to any form
of life. The rational, according canonical texts of Jainism says, Jayendra
Soni, behind the rule of non-violence is based on self-reflection and self-
experience that is further extended to other living beings. Soni quotes a
Jaina text, Sūyogada, where it is said, 
…  exactly  as  it  is  not  nice  to  me  if  I  am  wounded,  struck,
threatened, beaten, hurt, hit hard or killed with a stick, a bone, first, a
clod of earth or a potsherd – (yes) even if just a hair of mine is pulled
out I feel vividly the injury which causes me suffering and fear of it – so
too, know this, all higher beings, all plants,  all  lower  animals,  all
other living beings if wounded … or killed with a stick …, indeed even
if just a hair of theirs is pulled out, feel vividly the injury which  causes
them suffering and fear of it. If one has recognized this, then (it is
certain that) no higher being, no plant, no lower animal, no other living 
being may be beaten,  commanded,  subdued,  strained (or)  killed.
Truly I say: the venerable saints who were, who are and who will be they
all say, they speak, proclaim, explain the following: no lower animal,
no plant, no other living  being  may  be  beaten,  commanded,
subdued, strained or killed. This is the  pure,  constant,  eternal  teaching
proclaimed by those who know, because they  understand  the  world.  In
this way a monk renounces violence against living  beings  ….  (in  Soni
2014: 30-31
So  we  have  in  Jainism  in  the  form  of  universalizing  one’s  personal
experience, of acceptance or rejection, through the principle of equality to
