possessions,  and  indulges  in  sense-pleasures,  will  certainly  fight
with violent means, but violence does not, for that reason, become
justified  as  his  dharma.  There  is  only  one  dharma.  Non-violence
means  moksha.  And  moksha  means realizing Satyanarayana.  But
this dharma does not under any circumstances countenance running
away in fear. In this world which baffles our reason, violence there
will then always be. The Gita shows the way which will lead us out of
it, but it also says that we cannot escape it simply by running away
from it like cowards. Anyone who prepares to run away would do
better, instead, to kill and be killed. (CWMG vol. 33: 88–9) 
Further,  Gandhi  disaggregates  the  composer  of  the  text  from the text
itself by pointing out the overlaps between them. He claims that the text
— in this case the poem — should be considered ‘greater than its author’.
The  differences  are:  (i)  the  author  may  not  ‘necessarily  have  closer
conceptions of all its possible implications’ (ii) the author may not follow
‘in his own life the truth which he utters in his moment of inspiration’. This
discrepancy accounts for the ‘lives of many poets’ being ‘at variance with
the teaching contained in their poems’ (CWMG vol. 33: 87). Having made
this crucial distinction, Gandhi claims: 
That the overall teaching of the Gita is not violence but non-violence
is evident from the argument which begins in Chapter II and ends in
Chapter XVIII. The intervening chapters propound the same theme.
Violence is simply not possible unless one is driven by anger, by
ignorant love, or by hatred. The Gita, on the other hand, wants us to
be incapable of anger, and to attain to a state unaffected by the
three  gunas. Such a person can never feel anger. (CWMG vol. 33:
87)
What  is  important  here  is  that  Gandhi  takes  on  the  colossal  task  of
undermining the endorsement of war, thus violence, and ventures, or one
might say adventures, into claiming that Gita endorses satva amongst the
three gunas, the other two being rajas and tamas. A satvic person does
not get angry and cannot commit violence. Gita advocates satva, hence it
