cannot accept violence. Gandhi therefore concluded that not only does the
Gita not endorse violence, it, on the contrary, advocates the practice of
satva which is closer to non-violence. Gandhi undertakes this long and
arduous journey, makes several  exegetical  moves,  interprets differently
both by using internal resources within the text and outside it, also offers
reasons for rejecting the conventional interpretations that associated Gita
with violence. So there is this long journey where a weak Gandhi tries to
overcome this state through his reading of Gita. At the beginning of this
long journey, he himself admits that he was mentally weak. If this is so
then Basham’s claim that tradition influenced Gandhi does not tally with
this state of Gandhi. Even if he was influenced by tradition the intensity of
this influence was not strong rather it was weak. So, Basham’s claim that
Gandhi  was  influenced  by  tradition  is  not  completely  tenable  for  the
reasons  he  gives.  Moving  further,  one  of  the  important  influence  that
enabled Gandhi to overcome this state was his reading of Gita. Here he
was induced by two outsiders to read this text. Though he was induced by
an outsider to read Gita he makes active intervention into the reading of
the text.   There are two points here that need to be mentioned.  The
relation between Gita and Gandhi that was enabled by these two outsiders
falls outside the relations that is highlighted by Hacker. Hacker highlights
Gandhi’s relation with the West.  This relation between Gita and Gandhi
that falls outside Hacker’s account enables Gandhi to have a local access
with Indian society.  This  access that is  not factored by Hacker enables
Gandhi to bolster his relation with non-state society in India. This form of
relation eluded the attention of Hacker as he sought to exhaust Gandhi in
his relation with the West. Gandhi’s relation reveals a complex graph. He
moves from the state of weakness to be enabled by an outside other; he
then uses this resource to actively negotiate modernity, West and pre-
modern India. This sociological fact needs to be factored before we make
moral assessment of this intervention. Otherwise our moral conclusions
will acquire discounted form not because of the deficiency at the moral
level  but  because the social  axioms from which moral  conclusions are
drawn are not properly factored. 
