5. Truth: I will now leave this long discussion on non-violence and move
on to another important idea, which has not become as prominent in the
public  imagination.  This  is  the  idea  of  Truth.  Between  Truth  and  non-
violence Gandhi gave more importance to the former. He himself admits
this in a letter to Ranchhodlal Patwari: 
By  instinct  I  have been truthful,  but  not  non-violent  … I  put  the
former in the first place and the latter in the second place. For, as he
[a Jain muni] puts it, I was  capable  of  sacrificing  non-violence  for  the
sake of truth. In fact, it was in the course of my pursuit of truth that I
discovered non-violence. (1950: 3)
Given  the  primacy Gandhi  accorded  to  Truth,  there  is  a  need  to
retrieve the importance of the idea of Truth and install it at the centre of
public  discourse.  Truth  in  Gandhi’s  hands  undergoes  a  radical  and
fundamental  transformation.  First,  he makes a massive move when he
swaps the relation  between God and Truth,  reversing ‘God is  Truth’  to
‘Truth is God’. These statements need not be read as establishing identity
but  as  consisting  of  part  and  whole.  Let  us  identify  the  underlying
algorithm in  these statements.  In  the  earlier  formula Truth  becomes a
subset of a whole that is God. Strictly speaking, this makes Truth available
only  to  those  who  believe  in  God.  Truth  thereby  becomes  a  part,  an
instrument in the hands of religion and theology. It remains inaccessible to
those who do not believe in God. So non-believers are outsiders to Truth.
Therefore,  for  someone  who  wants  to  embrace  Truth,  it  becomes
mandatory  to  believe  in  God.  This  prerequisite  may discourage,  if  not
become an impediment to, many who want to access Truth. For instance,
there are atheists like Gora who are followers of non-violence. Thus, non-
believers are not admitted into the domain of Truth. 
Moreover,  there  is  another  problem  with  this  formulation  as
rendering truth within the domain of religion, one may have to face the
possibility of different claims of truth, different contested and conflicting
