the  experiences  of  others,  to  provide  justification  to  establish  ethical
principle of non-violence. 
This philosophical school not only advocated non-violence but also
provided  a  metaphysical  foundation  for  this  ethical  principle.  Gandhi
becomes a modern icon by reviving this classical philosophical idea and
ingenuously presenting it in a modern idiom accessible even to common
people.  He,  thus,  skilfully  expands  the  terrain  of  availability  of  this
classical concept to include not only those that practice Jainism or are
trained in philosophy, religion, and theology, but also the common people.
This  move  of  making  philosophical  ideas  available  to  the  public  is  an
important contribution of Gandhi. 
In  addition  to  this  democratic  gesture,  there  is  something
adventurous about his attempt.  He embarks on this project against the
backdrop of India’s freedom struggle, growing Hindu–Muslim polarization
in the 1930s and 1940s culminating in Partition,  and with a pervading
acceptance of the inevitability of violence in social and political life in the
world. Not many believed that the British would leave India though they
desired it in varying degrees. 
The other thing that was considered impossible was non-violence as
a political instrument to achieve independence. This is a common belief
held by many. Non-violence as a political instrument and India’s freedom
were not considered a possibility together. Against such a jarring backdrop
of impossibility, Gandhi brings non-violence to the centre stage of Indian
politics. At a theoretical level Gandhi seems to ask those who found the
indispensability of violence in politics the question: what is the purpose of
politics?  Is  it  to  bring people together or  make them fall  apart? If  the
former then non-violence discharges this task and not violence.  Similar to
that of making a case for non-violence, Gandhi introduces radical move in
moving from God is truth to Truth is God. This chapter will discuss some
important interventions that are ingenuously introduced by Gandhi.
