3. Gita and Gandhi: Gandhi  advocated non-violence and in  Gita Lord
Krishna induces the reluctant Arjuna to fight war that involved violence.
This second position that is in direct conflict with the first one becomes
clear as all who interpreted Gita accepted it as a text that endorses war.
Those like Tilak (CWMG vol. 37: 175) and Savarkar (CWMG vol. 37: 82)
accepted this conventional reading and recommended the use of violence
in their fight against the British. The violent dimension of the Gita was
used to incite the weak slavish natives to become strong and fight against
the British. This underlying association of the text with violence attracted
many towards it, making it a text to rally around. 
There  are  many  who  rallied  around  it  along  with  Gandhi,  which
makes Gandhi’s relation with the Gita more contested and complex. What
distinguishes  other  interpretations  of  the  Gita  during  this  period  from
Gandhi’s interpretation is that in most other thinkers, while recalling this
classical  text  in  addition  to  spiritualism,  the  social  aspect,  namely,
combating colonialism, and making a case for India’s independence looms
large. Gandhi, however, did not accept the conventional reading of the
Gita as endorsing violence. It is against this formidable background that
Gandhi embarks on an unprecedented hermeneutical adventure to claim,
with concrete textual evidence, that the Gita actually decries violence, not
endorse  it.  This  move  has  both  hermeneutical  importance  as  well  as
political  relevance. Gandhi’s interpretation of the Gita is not merely an
academic  exercise  though  his  interpretation  is  radical  even  by  rigid
academic standards. This text is not merely one amongst other texts in his
life and career. It is a major influence on his life. There are two additional
aspects  that  distinguished  Gandhi’s  engagement  with  this  text:  (i)  the
impact of the text on his personal life and (ii) his different, even radical,
way of interpreting the text that is different from both conventional and
contemporary interpretations.  
4.  Violence  to  Non-Violence:  There  are  two  apparently  conflicting
positions  in  Gandhi.  One  he  is  the  strong  votary  of  non-violence  and
Bhagavad Gita  had  an enormous  impact  on  him.  In  Gita  Lord  Krishna
