induces  Arjuna  who  was  reluctant  to  fight  war  to  fight.  War  involved
violence.  So  there  is  a  conflict  between  Gandhi’s  adherence  to  non-
violence and his acceptance of Gita. Gandhi resolved this conflict through
a long hermeneutical exercise. This exercise that eluded the attention of
many scholars on Gandhi offers a radical interpretation of Gita that reject
the all existing interpretations of this sacred text. He embarks on this task
by bringing two important variables in to the discussion. One is internal to
the text and the other external to it. The internal one is trigunas typology
in Gita, namely, Satva, Rajas and Tamas. The three gunas are internally
related to each other but they are organised in a hierarchical order where
Satva is at the top, Tamas is at the bottom and Rajas is in between these
two. If  Satva is the privileged guna and war belongs either to Rajas or
Tamas then Gita cannot be advocating the Satva on the one hand and war
and  through  war  violence  on  the  other  hand.  This  is  not  acceptable.
Gandhi solves this problem by retaining the first claim that Gita privileges
Satva while rejecting the second claim that it endorses violence. 
He maintains that the Gita advocates Satva hence it cannot accept
violence.  Having  made  this  larger  claim,  Gandhi  consolidates  his
interpretation that the Gita does not endorse violence. On the contrary, it
advocates the practice of Satva, which is closer to non-violence. He tries
framing a response to Krishna’s advice to Arjuna to fight the war and not
abstain from it.  This  is  perhaps the most contentious issue influencing
those  who  interpret  the  text  as  advocating  violence.  Here  too  Gandhi
takes  recourse  to  other  cardinal  virtues  such  as  non-attachment  or
nishkamakarma.  Krishna asked Arjuna to fight in the war to move him
from the tamasic to the rajasic state. Arjuna’s reluctance is not because of
his satvic nature as he had fought often enough in the past (CWMG vol.
37: 13). The reason for his reluctance is not non-violence but attachment
towards his kinsmen. When Arjuna is reluctant to kill, Krishna reminds him
that he has already committed violence. Having started on this course, he
needs  to  see  it  through  till  the  end.  Here  let  us  note  that  Gandhi
distinguishes inaction from non-violent action.
