 Gandhi clearly prefers violence or rajas if  the choice is between
rajas  and  tamas,  though  he  is  clear  and  consistent  in  advocating  the
doctrine of non-violence. Given this standpoint, Gandhi sees in Krishna an
attempt to save Arjuna from relapsing into tamas or inaction. It was this,
he says, that made Krishna ask Arjuna to take to violence. So Arjuna has
already  committed  violence,  and  he  is  now relapsing  into  inaction  by
refraining  from  fighting.  Gandhi  says,  he  is  ‘clouded  by  ignorant
attachment’  (CWMG vol.  33:  87).  Instead of  this  regression,  given  the
circumstances,  despite  non-violence  being  the  best  option,  Krishna
persuades Arjuna to fight to save him from this regression. In an effort to
circumvent regression Krishna persuades Arjuna to at least maintain the
status quo. This is clearly evident when Gandhi says: 
If a passenger travelling in a train which is running at a speed of
forty  miles  an  hour  suddenly  feels  an  aversion  to  travelling  and
jumps out of the train, he will have but committed suicide. He has
not in truth realized the futility of travelling as such or of travelling
by train. Arjuna was in a similar condition. Krishna, who believed in
non-violence, could not  have given Arjuna any advice other than
what he did. (CWMG vol. 33: 87–8) 
While this contextual necessity made Krishna advice Arjuna, this however,
says  Gandhi,  cannot  be  universalized and cannot  be  taken  as  Krishna
endorsing violence. Making this clarification Gandhi says, ‘But to conclude
from this that the Gita teaches violence or justify war is as unwarranted as
to argue that,  since violence in  some form or  other is  inescapable for
maintaining the body in existence,  dharma lies only in violence.’ On the
contrary, clarifies Gandhi, ‘The man of discriminating intellect … teaches
the duty of striving for deliverance from this body which exists through
violence, the duty, that is, of striving for moksha’ (CWMG vol. 33: 88). 
Non-violence  is  generally  contrasted  with  violence.  However,
Gandhi’s idea of non-violence is in a triangular relation with violence and
inaction. This is reminiscent of three gunas — tamas, rajas, and sattva —
