in Samkhya. Thus, the concept of non-violence is not only contrasted from
violence, but equally, if not more, from inaction. This is important because
while the contrast between violence and non-violence is evident, what is
not  emphasized  is  Gandhi’s  further  contrasting  of  violent  action  from
inaction.  He says in  Young India on 11 August 1920 that if  ‘there is a
choice only between cowardice and violence’ he would advise ‘violence’
(CWMG, vol. 21: 133) 
Thus Gandhi  clarifies  his  stand,  depicting the Gita  as  advocating
non-violence and explaining the reason and the context behind Krishna’s
advice to Arjuna to fight. He does this by pointing out that violence is to
be  preferred  to  inaction,  though  non-violence  is  the  first  preference.
Having made this claim where we turned away from the earlier situation
of  inconsistence  between  Gandhi’s  endorsement  of  non-violence  and
following the ideals of Gita that endorsed war and violence to the stage
where Gandhi made Gita as endorsing not violence but non-violence as it
privileged Satva that does not endorse violence but non-violence. Having
used this internal variable in changing the interpretation of Gita, Gandhi
turns  to  an  external  variable  that  falls  outside  the  text,  namely,  the
context of  narrating the epic The Mahabharata that contains Gita as a
part. Let me discuss this in the following.
Referring  to  the  context  of  the  epic  Mahabharata,  Gandhi  says,
‘Vyasa wrote his  supremely beautiful  epic  to depict  the futility  of  war’
(CWMG vol. 33: 87). Because the context of narrating the epic, which is
originally called as Jaya, meaning victory, is to dissuade the successors of
Arjuna, who are threatening to kill all serpents, about the futility of war,
particularly, the Kurushetra where there were no winnings except killing of
people. Taking on those who interpret the Gita as endorsing violence, he
says: 
When  I  was  in  London,  I  had  talks  with  many  revolutionaries.
Shyamji Krishnavarma, Savarkar, and others used to tell me that the
Gita and the Ramayana taught quite the opposite of what I said they
did.  I  felt  then how much better  it  would have been if  the sage
Vyasa  had  not  used  this  illustration  of  fighting  for  inculcating
