and astonishingly original feat of Vyasa for giving the reader a deceptive
feeling of historical realism, he laments, ‘how much better it would have
been if the revered Vyasa had not adopted the method which he did’.”
(CWMG, Vol. 37: p.82). While admitting that reproaching the great sage is
impertinent of him, he says, ‘But what should one seeking to serve truth
do?  What  must  one  do  if  one  sees  an error?  It  is  not  wrong  to  draw
attention, in all humility, to what one feels to be an error. This thought
remained in my mind for many years’ (CWMG vol. 37: 82). 
With this at the back of his mind, the worried Gandhi thought of
reading  the  epic  Mahabharata  to  get  a  better  understanding  of  the
‘atmosphere of the age in which the  Gita was written and the good and
the evil influences at work at that age’ (CWMG vol. 37: 82). He read the
Gujarati version of the epic while in jail. This became a turning point in his
understanding  of  this  great  epic.  It  was  then  that  he  understood  the
allegorical sense of the epic, beyond the historical sense that it evokes,
which is due to the ingenuity of Vyasa’s depiction of characters. Referring
to his realization that the illustrations that Vyasa used are very beautiful,
he says: 
Just as in Aesop’s  Fables,  and in  Tales from the Panchtantra,  the
authors  have  created  conversations  among  birds  and  animals  to
impart moral teaching, so in the Mahabharata virtues and vices are
personified, and great moral truths conveyed through those figures.
The description of the battle serves only as a pretext. (CWMG vol.
37: 82)
Earlier in his work too he had held the view that ‘physical battle is only an
occasion for describing the battle-field of the human body. In this view the
names  mentioned  are  not  of  persons  but  of  the  qualities  which  they
represent’  (CWMG vol.  37: 76).  If  we take this  into consideration,  then
says Gandhi,  we will  realize that ‘The  Mahabharata was not composed
with the aim of describing a battle.’ Rather, the ‘author has cleverly made
